it's uh it's a joy to welcome you all
today
uh
to this final
nsc anthropology tribute
seminar to dear david grebel
for those of you who don't know me i'm
alpasha i'm a professor
of anthropology here in the department
i'd like to
yes begin this last session by thanking
you all for the amazing solidarity i've
shown throughout this term
it's been really uplifting to see
so many people log in you know like
uh not just one week but every week for
the last term and from all over the
world
um
zoom seminars they have this real
frustration but
of presence but for this particular
series they've really enabled us to come
together
to pay tribute to david in a way in
which i think lsc anthropology friday
research seminars have not seen over the
many decades they've been running
i'd like to thank to all the speakers in
the series for their brilliant and
thought-provoking presentations and
we've recorded them all for posterity
they're available on youtube and the
journal for carl has just begun
releasing the scripts and accompanying
videos as a special feature too
and i'd also like to
take this last seminar to thank all my
co-conspirators
mattias parkmans for running these zooms
with me
julia ongarro megan laws and becky bars
for brainstorming the series
and co-editing the focal um
blog based on it and renata todd in the
department in the admin team here in
anthropology
i think what's been particularly
frustrating frustrating what's been
particularly
fascinating um for me to realize in
organizing and sharing these series is
the range of david's writings um which
is phenomenal
but also at the same time i think that
what this seminar series has revealed is
a consistency in what he argues you know
and that is kind of equally um equally
amazing
perhaps this was like most evident in
reading fragments which we discussed two
weeks ago
against the newly published dawn of
everything with which we began the
series
and to realize that 17 years ago david
had kind of charted some of the core
theoretical and political arguments
which he followed through till the end
of his life
today we turn to um jobs
david's last published book before he
passed away
and one he also wrote while he was here
at the lse
again many of the ideas are already
there in the utopia of rules
the discussion of which we cancelled
last week because of strike action
um jobs started off as a very
short essay published in 2013 in strike
magazine
it's called on the phenomenon of
jobs
and this essay hits a core nerve amongst
readers in europe and north america
where it went viral
and dozens of translations were produced
and the essay became the basis of a
yougov paul poll
and
david's literary agent and publishers
decided a short book would do well
and david had this ingenious idea of
using his twitter account which by then
nearly had a hundred thousand followers
to write to him about um he invited
people to write to him about their
jobs
and so hundreds of these confessional
testimonials poured in into this gmail
account that david had created for the
book
and david went back and forth with some
of those who wrote in
i remember when rather frustrating
evening with david at ceviche in soho
where he was suggesting that this could
be a new way to do ethnography
and i was like come on david
and uh he said yeah yeah you're right
before proceeding to read out some of
these confessions which he had organized
and collated into the book
david's idea was that a job is
one that even the person doing it
secretly believes need not or should not
exist
that if the job or even the whole
industry were to vanish either would
make no difference to anyone or the
world might be even a slightly better
place
and despite the potential of automation
in reducing work
even um
you know i mean keynes had the early
david was drawing on canes who would
have said that who said that
uh by now we should have a 15 hour week
in fact what we've what's happened is
we've witnessed the proliferation of
jobs
um
pointless uh jobs uh workloads have
increased bureaucracy and its violence
are at the heart of the problem uh for
david
their purpose is political we don't need
these jobs why do they exist if you keep
everyone busy with work
then they won't have time to fight to
protest create alternative political
structures
it's human freedom which is at stake
again
basic income
is one suggestion uh to move forward
but i'm going to leave it to our
speakers to elaborate and critically
engage with jobs
i'm delighted that we have today two
amazing anthropologists leading figures
in the anthropology of labor and
political economy amongst other things
so we have with us dr mao malona an
associate professor at the department of
the arts bologna university
mao david and i were previously
colleagues together in anthropology at
goldsmiths
mao is the author of two brilliant
ethnographies of steel towns and
industrial work and politics one on
sheffield here in the uk called made in
sheffield and another on volta redunda
in brazil called brazilian steel town
he's also co-editor of an
anthropological reader on an industrial
work and life with johnny perry who's
here today our first speaker in the
series and gear de neve
more recently he has a book on art
comments anthropology beyond capitalism
we also have with us dr andrew sanchez
who is an associate professor in social
anthropology at the university of
cambridge
like mao he completed his phd in
anthropology here at the lse his field
work was in india's jharkhand where he
worked around another steel city
jumpship or famously set up by the
multinational tata
and he worked amongst a casualized
workforce and the book he wrote criminal
capital violence corruption and class in
industrial india
um is yeah an important book
with shan lazar he has also edited labor
politics in an age of precarity and with
christian strompal class matters
like now andrew has many other excellent
publications i'm just picking and
choosing here the ones which are so
pertinent to today's discussion
so with that i hand over first
tomorrow for 20 minutes then to andrew
for the same
before we open up the discussion
as usual please feel free to post any
comments and questions in chat uh as we
go along but we will have a space for
uh q a um later on
welcome andrew welcome now over to you
mao
thank you thank you so much alpa
for inviting me and
i'm very
happy to be able to
join the the contribution for
commemorating david's uh work
um
and also this gave me a chance to read
the bushy jobs which was the only book
of david that i hadn't read and so uh it
was good to engage with it
and then as you said alpha
the really the aim of
the book is to
show that neoliberalism is a political
project
and not an economic one
and in fact that unlike classical
capitalism which was all about profit
and economics uh
financial
capitalism is
inefficient and is bureaucratic if not
violent which was uh partly
the theme that he discussed also in the
utopia rule
and so uh with this book which as you
said is an extension or re-elaboration
of the original argument on strike he
wants to
make us understand and address probably
a wider audience that capitalism is a
system that we produce every day
and that if we decide so we can decide
to produce a different system
and he also offers as you said uh some
suggestion including the universal basic
income
which is really a system of eliminating
jobs
all together
so let me first start
with the difference between and
jobs
bush jobs
involving
those jobs that are involved to be paid
for someone else
either on wage or salary basis
jobs that are so
they would say completely pointless
unnecessary permissions that even the
employees cannot justify their existence
their jobs are smokes and mirrors
and normally they are white collar jobs
so they are full of perks
and
they're full of status of honor and
prestige
but those who perform them know that
they are
in far pointless
but they have to pretend that they their
job is important so in fact
jobs are also based on facility and
pretense
and as it says
the lives of workers are based
on lies
whereas jobs are the opposite they
are jobs that are needed but they are
not well paid
they are
ben
of benefit to society
they are blue collar and paid by the
hour they are dignified but meaningful
and typically they are the reproductive
jobs of looking after people which
involve care empathy and emotional labor
and those two series of jobs cut the
private and public divide
particularly
david sees five categories of language
of jobs the first the flanky
jobs
which exist
only to make someone else feel or look
important
they are the servants the clients the
psycho fans the entourage of those at
the top of the failed retainers
david writes quote
imagine that a crowd of indigent
runaways often screaming as women in
desperate situations and other desperate
people gather around your mansion
the obvious things to do is to slap a
uniform on them and assign them to minor
tasks to justify their existence
and such roles tend to multiply in
economies based on rain destruction
close quote
flank is a motivation of servants and
maids which david knows have disappeared
in the north atlantic world the second
categories is that of goonies
there are people whose job have an
aggressive element telemarketers
corporate lawyers lobbyists advertising
marketing and publicity
the goonies are normally always
dissatisfied even if their surveys are
around 100 000 200 000 a year
and then there are the duct tapers i.t
workers inputting information to excel
spreadsheets
programmers who make hardware compatible
or the female administrative assistants
who end up doing a lot of work for their
bosses
their affective labor going to sue the
ego of men
fourth there are the
tickers
prepare report and reproduce the
bureaucratic apparatus of monitoring
surveillance and performance assessment
and lastly the task masters the managers
those who formulate the strategic
mission
business performances compose grids or
career progression
but in fact it turns out that a lot of
jobs
seem to be jobs really for instance
think about the dark papers i.t workers
who fix repair programs or make
different platforms compatible
they may be but they are
essential to the reproduction of value
and the platform capitalism
for instance the workers of the amazon
mechanical turk a crowd-sourced platform
for so-called quote human intelligent
tasks and quote that is small and
alienating digital work
takers are paid by an average of 15
dollars per day for anything between two
and ten hours
and
100 hits per day
platform capitalism is the productive
side of finance the new site of capital
is value creation and extraction fully
entangled with global industrial
production the digital infrastructures
and automation system
amazon facebook google and their
shareholders certainly don't think these
jobs are bushy and won't let them go
without the fight
or think about the flankies the jobs
such as portals security guards males
freelance scale workers
these are really jobs which are
neither blue color nor white color
which pertain to an unregulated
service economy which also proliferates
with the proliferation of finance
so the confusion here seems to stem from
the
slightly the politicized focus on work
rather than on labor
which discount the social relations of
production that is the field of
negotiation articulations and struggles
around which some human actions are
deemed to acquire more value than others
and underpinning the social construction
of skills tasks and actions as building
blocks of the whole ritual edifice of
boston microeconomics
marxism and anthropology has never been
too popular but certainly i think that
david's project was also to
make it compatible with anthropology
but there is an attack to productivism
and to label value theory in
anthropology from james ferguson's book
on redistribution lipum and lease on
financial circulation to various
analysis of the productivity of the
informal economy of slums has said the
bizarre effect of generating a vast
market for popular books about work
richard senec di mingo
recently jan lucassen or the
anthropologist james hussman whose
blockbuster book work also advocates 15
hours a week but from the perspective of
the stone age economics of the humanity
bushmen of namibia's kalahari desert
which he studied during his phd in
anthropology of denmark
but now he has set up his own
consultancy anthropos limited
so marx's labor theory of value says the
capital is political and economic
construction they systematically
undervalues and exploits those actions
that are attached to a wage relations
which itself is a form of human
evaluation it is not the content of the
action that matters it is the
relationship of production that does
both at the local and the global levels
in the entanglement between finance and
industry centers and periphery which
generates complex entanglement of
sheet and cheat sheet jobs
david's argument that the economy of
lake capital is economical
assumes the capital is enlisted some
point was about economics rather than
power
and that the economy or capitalism can
be fixed morally or productively with an
efficient worker organization and that
this reorganization consists in sorting
out which jobs are more important than
others
first reproductive jobs are more
important the productive ones productive
from the
point of view capital obviously but when
you look at this classification nearly
all jobs are reproductive
in fact the very problem of productivism
david argues is that he forgets that the
vast majority of the working class fixes
maintains look after machines people and
objects rather than heroically fighting
on the production line
david's intuition about the value of
maintenance of reproductive labor is
very important
but if nearly all human actions are
reproductive in the large sense
reproductive existent world and of
existing institutions how can we
distinguish between those which
reproduce capitalism such as unpaid
housework and those which reproduce life
outside
it instead of looking at the value of
how
the value of work is socially
constructed to the wage relations or to
other relationships david considers the
degree of satisfaction afforded by
different work
tasks or actions
satisfaction which is directly related
to their different affordance of agency
and freedom
the emphasis here is on the morality or
ethics of freedom
in fact there is a clear moral divide
between and jobs
labor is morally satisfying and
meaningful whereas a is immoral
alienating and ultimately satisfying
because it leaves the bullshitter
without agency and creativity and such
lack of agency clashes with humans
natural tendency to find pleasure in
seeing one's action reaching its
imagined end
but why is kevork satisfying despite
involves so little agency
or can a sense of agency emerge from
empowering other people's actions or in
the realization that all actions are
ultimately equally powerless because
deeply relational
an analysis of the social relations
surrounding the evaluation of actions as
in michael lumbeck's work
would have helped you
work is protestant ideology or ethics
but it turns out that freedom a work is
heavily constrained by the morality of
the time
david is interested in the morality of
labor of northern europe and north
america and his specific christian
protest and trajectory explicitly
leaving out the aristocratic and
pathetic vision of labor held in the
mediterranean and in the ancient greece
in the feudal economy in northern europe
dominated by the puritan and the
protestant ethical framework
paid and waged labor were a form of
education
and discipline of the working class of
training to show good manner
but they were limited to the initial
parts of one's life
its judeo-christian vision of humanity
which science reconstructs so well in
the sadness of sweetness
meant the work to be self-mortified
sacrificial and redemptive
capitalists transformed service into a
permanent relation of wage labor but
salvaged the ideology of feudalism
in fact both managerialism and
federalism are form of abstraction from
real production
in which appropriation and distribution
of goods rather than actual production
create elaborated rent hierarchy
quote financial capital isn't really
capitalism but a form of rent extraction
where the internal logic are different
from capitalism
since economic and political imperatives
have come to match
now it resembled managerial federalism
end quote
but was previous form of capital is just
economical and is not always profit a
form of rent extraction
more importantly under financial
capitalism the ethics of protestantism
mutates into a weird sadomasochistic
ideology that turns the relation between
social benefit and level of compensation
upside down
people should be compensated for
horrible jobs because meaningful jobs
are already compensating
productive labor as a form of punishment
alafuco
but in fact i think uh that
the message of david's work has always
been as i was saying before to try to
build a ethereal marxism within his
theory of value including of labor value
and in fact this kind of focal
understanding of contemporary capital is
a real form of moral punishment or
unproductive madness
is a radical change
from his previous marxist analysis of
capitalist labor as an inverted form of
slavery in critique of anthropology
his argument of the historical
entanglement of capitalism and slavery
was part of a broader reflection of
structural marxism system theory and the
political economic approach in
anthropology
but which was compatible also with the
radical black marxism of celek robinson
the core of david's
theory
of labor value is on reproductive labor
and here the central reference is the
feminist scholar nancy fob
for whom patrick is the system is a
systematic devaluation of power of
reproducing life
by women on alien men such a slave
achieve through three main mechanisms
first
the creation of property rights and law
they limit the circulation of people and
put it under male control
second res regional rights of women
children and sexually non-conforming
individuals and third under remuneration
of care work
so here slavery and capitalism are not
analyzed just as more of cultural
systems associated with patriarchy
aristocracy caste or race or simply as
work structures in which factories and
plantation mirror each other but as
interrelated political and economic
systems in which the wage relation is
entangled with and reinforced by
conflict in ideological construction of
personhood and forms of evaluation of
human action
the second trope
maxis drop in
this book job
is the relationship between finance
abstraction and marination especially in
the five sectors finance insurance and
real estate
this sector creates abstraction and
abstracted organization which hire
complicators to increase financial
extraction and the speculation connected
to them
so david argues quote finance creates
meaningless ritual and new age gurus who
paint abstraction as reality
forgetting that there are some things
that are more real than others and quote
marx described capitalism as a form of
regular abstraction too and finance as
soon as a multiplication of such
abstract logic
and scholar zone return consider
labor as the materialization of
the commodity form a real abstraction
but david discusses the proliferation of
finance abstraction and rent extraction
as unreasonable and unrealistic
deviation from classical capitalism
even if unrealistic contemporary forms
of intercapitalism of the kind described
by christopher breit or lisa atkins
cannot be challenged simply through
wages redistribution
or elimination of jobs since they are
deeply attached to assets inequality
but the best part of the book for me are
the descriptions of the creative
strategies of resistance of this new
recordizing dispossessed class of
made up of wikipedia ghostwriter
occupational poets toilet graffiti
artists deluded rockstars professional
dropouts and gossipers
it is precisely the creative agency of
these workers and in david's
empathies towards them that the books
call to action for me emerges
in the sense bush's job's greatest
potential is
a work of fiction or an inography of
direct action
which in defiance of the tragic
post-workers sociological narrative
gives voice to the creative withdrawal
artistic desires and post-capitalist
fantasies of platform workers whose
antiheroic politics resonates with that
of the lost people of madagascar
david optimism in in in
this manifesto of eliminating bushy jobs
reflects the hopes about the end of
capitalism that opened up after the
economic crisis of 2008
embodied here in the uk bicarbonateism
with which david had an affiliation
at the time even the gigantic
productivity trade union unite support
the elimination of job via the
universal basic income as a way into
fully automated luxury communism
this sensor vote was wiped out by the
recent global pandemic which is anything
widened the gap between the overpriced
jobs and the undervalued sheet
jobs on the one hand the lawyers
corporate accountants the platform
managers the internet influencer and
gurus on the other the amazon turkish
the it engineers who build new
simplified working environments or
installed powerful optical internet
cables in mid-class neighborhood the key
workers who deliver grocery parcel and
health services the analysis teachers
and carers who continue to be
responsible for a reproduction of life
deadly in humans the global pandemic
didn't single-handedly eliminate any
useless job or re-evaluated productive
labor
if anything
it introduced a new category of spectral
labor the labor of nurses who are both
underpaid and operate under daily dead
reworking conditions
if a pandemic cannot change capitalism
interstitial changes operating through
the cracks of capitalism as john
holloway will say or cultural
configuration of what could be to use
the time of murray buchke won't do
either
and in fact i'm now working on a project
of universal basic income in brazil and
i must say that the problematic
associated with
the notion of eliminating
work
as a letter me really of the problem of
thinking about targeted policy measures
without the elimination the elimination
of capitalist social relations but maybe
this is what david intended
and from where we stand now and looking
back in 2013 when the article was
written
seems to glance into a different era of
intellectual intellectual hope and
political mobilization so fully embodied
in david's charismatic figure scholar
and activist
and his call to action as hard to follow
as it might seem continues to strongly
resonate with me
thank you
[Music]
thank you mal for this fantastic
exposition
and critique um it's really wonderful um
hand over immediately to andrew before
we open the space for discussion
andrew sanchez thank you
great thank you very much um i'm quite
touched to be invited so thank you for
asking me
so a few weeks ago i received a message
from a colleague
the message was a single line of text
punctuated by an exclamation mark
it was a sort of funny thing that one
friend says to another
when their most ridiculous suspicions
have been proven true
the message said this there's a
committee for the membership of
committees
my colleague discovered this while
filling out a form at the university of
cambridge that required her to declare
all the committees she sits on
ostensibly to keep an eye on our
conflicts of interest
i had to complete that form too because
i'm a trustee of the university
and one of the things that that means is
that committees play a very substantial
role in my working life too substantial
in fact
at the time of speaking i sit on about
20 of them
i spend hours per month sitting in one
committee checking the minutes of other
committees that i also sit on
sometimes i write reports that are
technically addressed to myself
this is not the satisfying and
intellectually curious life i imagined
when i decided to become an academic
it feels to me like i'm trapped in an
escher picture
walking endlessly up and down a looping
stairway to nowhere
so of course there would be a committee
for committees
that's what happens when you have so
many committees
like so many aspects of human social
life graber has an idea about this
experience
it's an idea about that feeling of
wasting your time on tasks that are just
not worth doing
the idea is called jobs
it says that most of us spend our time
doing jobs that are unsatisfying
and which serve no real purpose for
society
graber says that capitalism has given us
these jobs to keep us all busy
the jobs book was adapted from
an essay published in strike magazine
one of the most memorable arguments for
that essay
is the claim that there's an inverse
relationship between one's salary and
the genuine social importance of one's
work
the more important you are to society
the less you get paid
during the covid19 pandemic graber was
proven correct
when lockdowns prompted many nations to
categorize some people as essential
workers without whom society would
collapse
if you had to go to work then you were
genuinely important to society
but you probably didn't get paid a lot
for being so
this idea maps very well onto graber's
vision of a world of dockers
nurses and rubbish collectors
ranged against all the management
consultants and people sitting on
pointless committees
like so much for graber's work the essay
made me question why we do the things we
do
in a true spirit of anarchism the work
was essentially
destabilizing means that it revealed the
injustice
and weakness and fast of the existing
social order
and it showed the possibility for change
as i once heard graver say in the 2010
london teachout shortly before a riot
ideologies of power are like the glass
windows of a jewelry store
they tell you to stay in your place but
if enough people smash them
it becomes clear they were always just
glass
the jobs essay was really in
that spirit
it was a prompt to imagine a different
world and i loved it
but when that prompt was expanded to the
length of the book it was stretched so
thin that you could see through it
i'm going to talk about jobs by
considering three things
first whether graber misunderstands how
tasks relate to one another in
complex systems
second whether the thesis misunderstands
capitalism's tendency towards
profiteering
and the disregard for marginal
populations
and finally
whether the thesis is focused on the
wrong kind of human satisfaction in work
but this is a short comment so each of
those issues will be addressed only
quite briefly
part one
tasks
one of the main problems with the book
was the research method
which largely rested on asking people
which aspects of their work were
this is a problem because by focusing
largely on the emic experience of work
we do not necessarily understand the
structural significance of that work
accurately
a person paid to guard an empty
warehouse may seem to be doing a
job
and perhaps it feels that way too
but the work is nonetheless generative
of profit for somebody else even in a
deeply attenuated manner
in that instance that job would be
integral to an opaque structure of risk
assessment and insurance
that doom some of us to stand in front
of empty warehouses
because doing so is in the economic
interest of other people
the jobs model tends to
conflate questions of work satisfaction
with those of wider structural and
economic significance
more importantly
the model does not grapple with the fact
that there is no necessary consistency
of experience in jobs through
time
the model implicitly rests on the
assumption of a continuous temporal
imagination of work
where satisfaction is to be had all the
time or not at all
that's not how work functions
and it's especially not how box
ticking work functions
such forms of bureaucratic work
make up a fairly substantial proportion
of braver's analysis
one may spend all day checking whether a
box on a form has been ticked and it
might feel pointless
but on the very odd occasion where it
turns out the box has not been ticked
or whether form contains a lie
that's the moment where the value of the
exercise becomes clear
and a job can sometimes become
socially transformative
imagine for a moment that you are the
absurd character
of a once working class marxist academic
in an elite university
spending hours a week in your office
trawling through committee papers
perhaps your soul aches with the
suspicion that you're just wasting your
time and you sold out a long time ago
until one day you find an innocuous line
of text tucked away in a committee paper
a text that if unchallenged
would quietly
but effectively
remove permanent employment status from
everyone in your university
that change their institutional role or
job title at any point in the future
a true story
suddenly it seems important that
someone's there to read all those papers
and it seems especially important that
the people doing the reading should not
assume that the work is always
jobs are not usually
all the time
and it would probably make more sense to
rather speak of tasks
one should then consider whether those
tasks coalesce into something more
impactful
and why this is integral to the nature
of complex economic and institutional
action
you would be prudent to pay more
attention to the box ticking bureaucrats
because even if you consider their work
to be stupid
the combined aggregate of their tasks
will nonetheless shape the world around
you however you probably wouldn't know
about it because bureaucracy is by its
very nature quiet and anonymous
the transformative dimensions of much
bureaucratic work are slower and they
are crucially less individualized than
other types of work
but nonetheless they coalesce into forms
of power
and power is never
many of graeber's jobs i think
are actually artifacts of social
complexity
and their impact is distributed at
social and temporal scale that exceeds
his model
i doubt the existence of a coherent
category of jobs
there's also no evidence that those jobs
would exist to keep people out of
trouble
part two
capitalism doesn't have a committee
modern capitalism lacks the concerted
agency to create mass pointless work
purely for reasons of social engineering
principally it strives towards the
economic exploitation of mass
populations
and is content to abandon those that it
cannot readily exploit
grader says that the only societies that
used to give people pointless work were
state socialist ones
they did this to redistribute wealth and
to keep people out of trouble
however he argues that in the late 20th
century increasing mechanization and the
shifting of production to the developing
world
left much of the working population in
wealthy capitalist societies with
nothing to do
that population was a threat to the
established social order
and needed to be given jobs to
distract them and to tie them out
this claim is incorrect
neoliberal capitalism doesn't have a
committee
it certainly doesn't have the type of
committee that engages in a coherent and
effective global endeavor
to stop us from sliding into thoughtful
idleness
some people would like to believe that
neoliberalism doesn't exist at all
and is only conjured into being by
left-wing social scientists
those people are wrong
there are explicit packages of policies
reforms professional networks and ways
of looking at the world that make
neoliberalism a real thing
and neoliberalism is a technology of
governance
but still
neoliberalism does not have a committee
i appreciate anthropological attention
to the discursive and moral life of
neoliberalism
and i've written about how neoliberal
actors may sometimes feel that they're
doing good in the
world however for a structural analysis
like jobs
what really matters here is the core
motivation of capitalism
which is still profit
the notion of a world of pointless
employment that does not exist to make
money simply does not fit with what we
know about most of economic life
more broadly there is lingering issue
that capitalism appears untroubled by
the fact
that plenty of people in wealthy
societies have not been given pointless
work
if i can be permitted to stick with the
anecdotal style of jobs
here's another example to illustrate my
point
i was raised on a british council estate
where a good proportion of people were
completely without any form of work
some of those people tended to get into
trouble
and aged into lives where they harmed
themselves and others
feasibly those populations could be
imagined as a threat to social order
but the committee was untroubled by that
possibility
capitalism was happy for our family to
live on state benefits for many years
treading water just below the poverty
line
sliding into depression and violence and
substance use
although the hateful notion of a chav
underclass suggests otherwise
in my experience people in those
environments often have a critical
perspective on how the world works
and sometimes they try to do something
about it
it was in just such an environment that
i was radicalized as a young teenager
and grew into the person that wrote this
essay
now this personal example is perhaps a
little cloying
but the fact remains that there are just
enough too many people left behind by
the jobs committee
that the idea doesn't make any sense
or less anecdotally we might consider
populations
truly at the acute end of the social
marginality spectrum
those apparently expelled by capitalism
as if they are somehow worthless
condemned to lives of floating
marginality
living in refugee camps or prisons
standing by the road at labour markets
waiting for a gig that just never comes
it's mistaken to see those populations
as lacking in creativity and will
but it's also really mistaken
to not recognize those populations as
sources of economic value for capitalism
philippe bourguard's work on predatory
accumulation shows this
as does much older thinking on the
prison industrial complex
it turns out that those allegedly
dangerous populations are still worth
something to somebody
if this were not so
then marginalized communities would not
be beset everywhere
by landlords
credit agencies racketeers brokers
and for profit providers of social and
justice services
capitalism has not found ways of giving
dangerous populations jobs to
keep them out of trouble
rather capitalism
is all too often immune to the trouble
those populations might cause
and indeed it routinely finds those
populations to be a useful area of
exploitation and value
part three
what isn't
when jobs discusses how people
feel about their work
it rests on graves theory of value
where action that is meaningful is that
which is socially productive
i'm a fan of grader's theory of value
but his reconfiguration of it for a
discussion of work tasks is not quite
right
for graber work is socially productive
principally when it cares for the world
i believe that that idea is trained at
the wrong level of human action
the ability for one's work to care
might be conceived as just one
expression of the wider ability to
transform the world
as i've argued elsewhere
the single most important factor in
people's determination of satisfying
work
is an engagement with processes that
make demands on one's ability to effect
change on the world
put simply
people like work that challenges them to
alter something
be it the material form of an object
the value of a commodity
the dispositions of other people
or the skills and capacities of oneself
troublingly transformative work does not
map onto caring
and some people may find it enjoyable to
do impactful things
that actually harm others
more broadly transformation is not
restricted to an impact on human
relations alone
and is not restricted to making a
lasting contribution to social life
so i've spent my working life talking to
people about their work in life
and because i'm an enthusiast
i tend to do this even when i'm not
actually working
my experience is that there are many
jobs that i would find pointless to do
myself but which other people don't
and that's because they've generally
found a meaningful transformative
dimension in their work that would elude
me
and as a consequence of finding that
transformative dimension
they might find it satisfying to manage
ipos
trade stocks or write advertising copy
the transformative action of work
needn't happen in an instant
and indeed it often takes lots of people
working together to make it happen at
all
people are generally smart enough to
know this
which is why the daily grind of
tasks
doesn't necessarily translate into a
holy
job now and again the box hasn't been
ticked properly and it matters
in conclusion
i think the jobs is basically
wrong
i like the fact that a book like this
exists
and i wish that there were more of them
anthropology is often mired in citations
and pedestrianism
else we are that other type of
anthropologist
my very least favorite type
which is the one mired in pretentious
performative theorizing
as a consequence it feels to me that
we're a discipline that struggles to say
things that are original but of wider
social significance
but in jobs we have a work that
is imaginative
fun to read
and about issues that most people can
relate to
it's the voice of a man speaking to the
reader
not as an academic showing off or trying
to intimidate you
but speaking to you as though he just
met you at a party
and you were lucky enough to be chatting
to somebody that really made you think
that's why i love about greater's
writing
the essential humanity of it
and i think of it in terms of humanity
because it conveys the mind of a person
that cares enough
to look at things that matter to
everybody else
and who cares enough to try and speak
about them
in a way that would be exciting and
intelligible
even when gravel was wrong he made you
think
and what he made you think about was
invariably something really
important and that's what i think an
academic should be for
that's it
brilliant absolutely brilliant both of
you were just fantastic and we've had
really powerful um
critique but also um
yeah uh
giving david you know do you respect and
credit through that critique it's
it's been brilliant um i'm going to open
up the floor
for comments and
uh
questions
does anybody have any please raise your
hand or use the um
use the
chat function
i see we have
my lim zhao
would you like to unmute yourself my
name
uh yes uh
oh yes uh so thank you very much uh so
my question is uh throughout this
session of the seminar uh webinar it
reminds me of
american accent abilities clayford
digits put in human are animal attached
to a web of meaning created by
themselves to posting presenting all
sorts of policy
regulation to our cultural effect is not
necessarily productivity
but
when it comes to job right it
gives individual cooperation and society
permission to undergo a shift
so in question is do we really need
permission to undergo a shift in values
and
does
it have a authority to give permission
by doing so yes that's my question
i'm really terribly sorry my name but i
wasn't able to because of the internet
um
interference i was not able to hear your
question totally but maybe our speakers
have
have heard it
yes mao seems to say yes
yeah i mean uh
what i got is uh whether we should
have permission to uh challenge
job and who should give this permission
yeah i think it's it's about um
i i don't have a uh yeah
a very specific answer i must say i mean
i think that what david was trying to do
is to
uh is to
make us aware that each of us has a
possibility to challenge basically you
know the way in which
every day we reproduce certain systems
of power i think this is a
was a very important message and
not so much as a way of
giving permission to someone but as a
way of
empowering let's say people as andrew
was saying making them understand that
they were themselves intellectual they
didn't need intellectuals let's say
thanks
i am i've promised the
room full of phd students and post-docs
uh
that's labeled charlotte and everybody's
gathered together in one room today i've
promised them a space
to speak so
um please yeah do uh
do do unmute yourself when you're ready
because i can't see your raised
functions yet
um rebecca
first first you and then claude and and
i'll come back to the phd room
hi thank you um
uh
yeah i'm here also with a group of
students from the university of sussex
studying the anthropology of work and
labor and because our teaching was
scheduled at this time we haven't been
able to be or i haven't been able to
come to any of these
um sessions about david's work and i
have to say i'm realizing now and
particularly with those final comments
from andrew that i probably
haven't missed out on this have not
processed
a lot of personal feelings about david's
loss and um yeah uh andrew sort of
brought that to light
for me a little bit there
um and i think i mean
i guess i am going to respond to
specifically to what what andrew was
saying
which is that um
that i do
what i find both
useful and
difficult about the concept of
jobs really comes down to this issue of
humanity and like how it it helps us
think about
humans at work and our relationships
with one another and how we value one
another's work
because obviously
when it comes to the essential workers
and i think mao was talking a lot about
this we all want to stand in solidarity
with essential workers we all want to
stand in solidarity with workers who are
doing
important work that
is low paid that is the work of cleaning
and and caring and all of these things
that david's drawn attention to
but
my question is really like what is the
potential
or the mechanism for solidarity over
this issue of
can you hear me okay i can hear a weird
be back it is okay okay um
you know amongst those who
within the places we work we might
perceive as doing jobs that are
requiring us to fill out a lot of
paperwork we don't see the value of we'd
rather spend our time in what we think
is more useful work with students or
whatever and i this came home to me
really strongly um the other day uh one
of my phd students was emailed
and some
administrators said you haven't filled
out online how many meetings you've had
with your supervisors over this amount
of time
and you need to do this
and i responded to the student with an
email saying i can't tell if this is the
most caring wonderful email to get like
they've noticed you know have you been
engaging with your supervisors and
trying to make sure you are
or is this just absolutely absurd and
infuriating and taking up all of our
time and unfortunately i don't know how
because i didn't see a bcc it went to
that administrator who then came back to
me and then i felt like
awful because i was devaluing very
openly this person's work so anyway
there's much more i could say and i
won't but i just wonder like where is
this potential for solidarity that's not
about scorn towards people
you know within within these roles
thanks everyone i
appreciate it so much
alpha can i respond to that
andrew please do
okay i mean like sort of reading um
reading the book in the essay to me
the two areas where it has the most
political weight
and where it's actually identifying
things that could be agendas for change
is thinking through
the kind of the proper valuation and
compensation for all forms of employment
and then secondly thinking through that
kind of basic issue of kind of
whether or not people are overworked
and so on and so on so i mean that kind
of example you've had of the
administrator the kind of hr person
someone in the university
there is an undercurrent and i'm sure
it's unintentional but there's an
undercurrent in the jobs essay
in particular
of like being slightly sneering to that
kind of work
but of course that kind of work where
you're box ticking and double checking
other people's work
that only really exists because the
administrative work itself has been
underfunded and under resourced and it's
essentially been out outsourced to you
to do some of that work which is why
there's now someone standing over your
shoulder double checking that you can
properly
um so i think actually like a lot of
these kind of issues
they really do come down to as i say
like the proper valuation of work
and also kind of questions of workload
so that example i was given in the kind
of comment of me sitting in all those
committees and sending all those emails
yeah it does kind of feel like
that's not what i'm supposed to be doing
i'm supposed to be
writing comments like this
teaching students
but it's the um yeah it's the fact that
the administrative service is so
under-resourced
which is what ups my workload with
things like that right and i think
that's presumably that's an experience
almost anyone working in the university
right
thanks andrew i think lots more to be
said on that one um over claude and then
ford michael i wanted to
very quickly comment on that sorry uh
saying that i think
david
popularization of uh
nancy fob issue of reproductive labor
and the making of people that is a very
important issue to
uh as a as a an agenda that has been
popularized i think that's it's a part
of the solidarity and
and i didn't think that david was not
in solidarity with uh most of actually
the interview is in fact they offer
they came forward for two days so i
think that was actually a project of
solidarity i i read a lot of solidarity
in that descriptions
thanks
claude and then for diane michael
thank you very much for for the talk and
i would like to just uh just curious
about how
the job can
be re-read in the context of kobe 19
pandemic because i think like it's very
crucial because there there were a lot
of people who have been like immediately
looking at the pandemic and the crisis
as a critique of capitalism but i wonder
how
how this pandemic crisis has already
restructured perhaps or reconfigured the
order of labor system um whereby from
which you know the the health of of of
capitalism is reliant no longer in labor
time but in the extraction of labor or
say you know precarities and then
non-emptyness of labor work um thank you
very much
thanks claude mao you addressed this in
your presentation do you would you like
to elaborate
yeah i mean to me what is extraordinary
is that indeed
actually reflect david's argument which
is that is really astronomy the nurses
despite the fact that it was really
clear that their work was the most
important er er
in in society they were you know they
were not offered pay rise and in fact
they apparently are the category of
workers are most indebted in the uk
so that is extraordinary that shows that
really there is a
some kind of will to actually keep
underpaid reproductive workers or
workers that do reproductive labor and
the second thing that i was saying is
yes i think that
there has been an increase i think of
the gap between
uh
you know
let's say job and job so
so there's been an increase of people
working
uh on let's say either remotely or as
andrew was saying in in in kind of doing
job that requires presence despite the
fact that the pandemic is still ongoing
so
yeah on the one end it makes present you
know face-to-face job more dangerous on
the other hand also increases the kind
of zoomification and the digitalization
of work which is also another side of
inequality
we have quite a few questions
maybe you could take uh if you want to
address the last question you can in a
response later
um
i'm getting a lot of feedback i don't
know if um
someone's got their mic on that they
could mute or if it's just it might just
be me right
i am as well today the internet seems to
be really bad here too but um
fraud um maybe my task maybe can we
check if there's anybody
on i am checking but i don't think
they're stationary okay
um fraud over tv
yeah i mean i mean those those
interventions were fantastic um i guess
i just have sort of a couple of thoughts
in relation to them where the
conversation has gone as well
um and the first one is in relation to
andrew your point about tasks
maybe being the better way to think
about
the sort of meat of what's going on here
and i mean at least personally i agree
entirely
but i wonder whether
one way to think about the book in
relation to the original essay is to
really trace the kind of
the material history of why the book
comes about one in terms of the fact
that hey this is going to be a cash cow
for the publisher because dave's got
great name recognition and this clearly
struck a chord that's the one side of it
but then the other side is that all of
the research in relation to the book is
creating this gmail account where people
who have read the essay fundamentally
then come in with their own
perspectives on their own experience of
work which is the emmit component right
and so in a way i wonder whether the
fact of it being called jobs is
itself the intervention right because in
the best way of all david's work really
uh particularly explicitly public facing
stuff right it strikes a chord
and somebody who maybe had a sense of
alienation in kuwait as it was from what
it was they were doing suddenly has a
mode of recognition which feels to them
to some degree agent and allows them to
um if nothing else produce this account
and in the broader ferment in the uk of
corbinism etc like like what mao was
saying that's the kind of avenue of
solidarity that existed for a moment
right and the the sort of space for
political action which was this
recognition then feeding into broader
um strands of collective action
right so maybe that's the way to think
about the book in relation to the essay
um right that the book is itself a
um an artifact of the work of these
ideas and their their reception by huge
amounts of people um so yeah i guess
tasks i agree i think is better in terms
of actually explaining what's going on
in an athletic level
but maybe jobs had its own sort
of function in relation to its political
uh messaging and then just sort of
briefly um again picking up on something
else that you were saying andrew in
terms of the fact that these are the
sort of experiential emic level
ways of understanding your role and that
structural level other stuff's going on
right and there are ways in which this
is in fact producing
well in the economic interests of
somebody not you and it put me in mind
of going back to the first of these
sessions um johnny's comments on lost
people and the fact that there is no
broader structural analysis on those
terms the political economy is absent
from the book itself it's about these
emic
narrativizations of how people
understood what was going on um and the
sort of deeper and and more recent
histories of slavery and the moments
afterwards in madagascar and it did put
me in mind maybe that although i think
at least from conversations with david
of my own that that he clearly saw the
various strands of his own work as
really quite fiercely integrated and and
apple was saying the same in terms of
things from fragments showing up again
in the most recent book which is
definitely true right but i wonder
whether maybe from
not david's perspective we can see
an interesting split between the more
explicitly ethnographic work between the
madagascar work
jobs if you want to call it an
ethnography and maybe even direct action
and then the more anthropological in
terms of generalizing longer deeper
history works which do not take as read
particular forms of emic perspective and
i wonder whether with the emic
perspectives certain aspects of david's
interests come to the fore which are
maybe less
structurally inclined whereas in the
other works maybe even the
production inside out um marxist slavery
essay that mao was talking about we have
a very different
version of david at reception even if
for david the ideas were integrated just
a few thoughts
should i respond to that help us yeah
yeah
yeah full ad i mean i think you're
absolutely correct i mean my feeling on
um you know if i think about
jobs
in relationship to the kind of you know
wider collection of david graber's work
it's a completely different type of book
to the value book clearly
i don't think that's necessarily
problematic i think when the book came
out
when i was speaking to sort of uh you
know people that are specialists in the
anthropology of labor
a lot of people didn't like it
and there's a kind of a sort of a tone
of snobbishness attached to it because
it's not a real ethnography you know to
put that into kind of like triple scare
quotes
i don't think that's necessarily a
problem i mean i think actually
if you're gonna
produce big ideas
and you're an anthropologist
you should be able to have a bit of
license to kind of play around with the
form of the writing and to also play
around a little bit with the kind of the
style of the data collection so i think
that's fine
but in terms of the wider political
value that it has i think
what fouad said is absolutely correct
the kind of to me
and this is just me saying this to you
is just some bloke obviously to me the
long-term contribution of the book
is that it inspired people all around
the world to look at something that they
already knew already experienced
and suddenly say
maybe that's a job right it's
that kind of like
you know consciousness building
that's the value of it so if you think
about something i said in the comment
which is being in this teacher and
graber said something like you know
ideology is like a glass window of
jewelry store right
that's a pretty obvious point
and it's a point that you know bakunin
made a really long time ago but the
point is that david graber said it at
that moment at the right time
and he said it in a way that everyone in
the room could understand
and it i remember him saying it you know
more than a decade later and crucially i
remember how it felt to hear him saying
it and the effect of it so that's the
kind of spirit that i'm kind of like
taking this book in um i don't think
it's good anthropology
but i think it's kind of you know an
interesting exercise in what
anthropologists can do politically
thanks uh thanks andrew yeah foreign
really interesting i i would disagree
with
the split between david the ethnographer
versus david the theorist you know um
but we can talk more about this later i
think it's a really interesting
discussion
um michael
and then hats and then chris yeah
yeah so and just thought there was a
little bit of a lot of confusion in this
book around and it shows up as a
discussion about oh the method was it a
proper ethnography but mainly people say
well is it a job if somebody
doesn't believe it's a job
and the answer is of course of course
that david graberges
has is
is no it's not a job if someone
doesn't think their job is then
it's not a job
and people kind of scratch the head well
what if i think somebody else has a
job and if we try to relate
that to david graber's theory of value
his theory of value if we could kind of
put it in short it's a performative
theory of value where every exchange
that we make demonstrates the world that
we want to live in so that doesn't mean
the two people who make the exchange
necessarily agree it's a performative
theory of value you're performing value
in an exchange and many people um feel
that you know might not agree with that
as uh with what you know what what the
other person sometimes people don't have
the same world that they want to live in
but they might have an agreement with i
this exchange
forwards mayans this exchange doesn't
your end so if you look at a
job this is an exchange
right and the exchange is between the
employer and the person who is employed
that job is in exchange so it performs
the world and some people
who feel uh then and when people make an
exchange where the world that they have
to perform is not one that they really
agree with they normally if they could
they would change it if they thought
well this is i'd get rid of
this i'd change this and do something
better right and and the way that that
those types of exchanges are maintained
is through the use of violence and
coercion and so this is why the emphasis
on spiritual violence is in this book
it's this book i mean i can't really
speak to the ethnographies of work and
all the larger structural theory but at
a rhetorical level it kind of
demonstrates that if we
if the world that we want to live in is
care work
and concern for people then these types
of exchanges
many people collectively think socially
useful production or caring for other
people is something that's real and
david argues that in this book and that
some of these jobs are not and he's
typically relating people saying is a
job because it doesn't have
socially useful production
but i mean that's not what everybody
feels so so
i think if we look at um
how a um the the every exchange is
performed by the people that performs a
set of values by the people that
um make that exchange then we can start
to look at why this methodology of
people should say what they feel whether
their job is or not and if they
feel their job is
then it's job to them that
means that the world that they want to
live in is something that isn't like
this
that's what i think is missing from this
discussion
um
i i think you're right but i think
that's what i uh
that's missing from the book in the
sense that i i highlighted michael
lambert despite description of value of
action as a performative uh as a
performance space and and and and david
also talks about in value but it doesn't
in this book so
the reader doesn't you know doesn't get
it basically
um
yeah
i also want to say that i i don't think
that the distinction between david and
nograph and david activist is very um
yeah it's it's it's a it makes sense and
not even in this book but i didn't want
to i don't want to take too much space
about this yeah
thanks andrew would you like to add
something or should i invite hanson
chris
uh look maybe we could take more
questions i think we've only we've only
got a couple of minutes left i think
right
we do tend to go until half past but um
yeah we we will see hands
thank you so much uh andrew and mao for
for those great talks i think you are
facing a really difficult task uh
dealing with this book in particular
when when we are still struggling for
instance with the dawn of everything and
so many other things i mean i my
personal feeling was always job
was perhaps not you know the
the strongest book it was definitely not
the the kind of most anthropological one
and i i i'm still having kind of
questions of how to how to kind of
grapple with like david's legacy and in
all of this um and i i think the the
points that you raised especially andrew
in his talk on
you know
that that do we necessarily have to kind
of uh assume that that each worker
understands the meaning of
an organization the meaning of society
understands
his or her
meaning of his work and um
secondly kind of
the distinction that that you you drew
andrew between transformative and kind
of moral aspects it is not the same like
if you you change the world or or you do
a good thing and and it's not
necessarily all all united in in the
knowledge of the actor
uh him or herself
um maybe you unwittingly do
good things or bad things uh when in
your work
but then i actually have a different
question which is about the the actual
political consequence i totally take
food's point that this was so meaningful
for so many people at the time it's
really great that someone some
anthropologist said these these things
etc but what did he actually recommend
was something very concrete it was
universal basic income and that's that's
discussed in some detail at the at the
end of the book
and i wonder whether the theoretical and
conceptual and methodological flaws that
we have discussed
impact on the the political consequences
i.e
if if some of the framework is wrong
then then maybe we cannot really work
with the conclusion either which is
universal basic income and what what
could that be in my mind it's universal
basic income doesn't do away with
structural inequalities it just kind of
raises them to a different plateau it
sounds very nice that you would have um
you know
you give everyone i don't know 500
credit months and then you you don't
have to deal with you don't have to do
jobs let's let's put it that's
simple but really what it will create at
a different level is all kinds of new
inequalities just just kind of plateaued
up
um
maybe also questions so what do you
think about universal basic income
thanks thanks a hand that's very helpful
i'd love to address that too but i'm
going to get to give it over to andre
mao first
i i can be very quick on that hands um i
think universal basic income isn't a bad
idea
yeah okay
um in terms of sort of thinking through
how the things you were
discussing relate to the current moment
in labor and so on and you mentioned
something about the pandemic i think one
of the more interesting things that kind
of cropped out of this out of the
pandemic
is that
a whole section
of the laboring population
who might at one point have defined
their jobs as and pointless and
unvalued
are all of a sudden being told
that their labor is absolutely essential
right so in terms of our speculation on
the impact that would have on the value
of labor and labor politics is too early
to say
but i think that's certainly something
that so all of us on this call are
interested in these issues that's
something that we could be thinking
about researching in a lot more detail
going forward so you know the kind of
men and women that work in my local
co-op in the little village i live in
outside cambridgeshire
that's i've done that kind of work
that's the kind of work where you do it
you're constantly told this is a waste
of time like it's undervalued it's not
as good as everything else
all of a sudden you have everyone in the
village coming in and kind of like you
know thanking you for your work right it
hasn't translated into higher pay or
better working conditions but it must
certainly have had an impact on how
people think about work
i'm certain i know
i
i want to i don't think we have the time
to discuss the universal basic income
but i wanted to say that
i'm convinced of the opposite that
despite the fact that the beginning the
pandemic big trigger this open
conversation about jobs
in fact we have the proof i was saying
in in the in the um contract was signed
uh for
public workers especially for nurses
that this is not the case
that that that
there is an amazing political
willingness to keep people who do
important and even dangerous jobs
underpaid
this is the scary thing about the
situation i think
uh intensive universal basic income
that is perfect for the right and the
left so it's it's it's very strange to
understand without the
the the consequences and and it it's
it's clearly demonstrated in in context
of the global south is very useful but
uh not necessarily in places like london
um
so yeah it's it's uh
i think it did it did open that
discussion at the right time when when
it was on the on the manifesto label uh
i don't know
about the future yeah
thanks yeah and there's a useful comment
from harry evans as well about you
universal basic services
um
i i
i'm going to i'm going to hand over to
chris uh to continue the discussion
right thank you very much for those you
know they're very thought-provoking
papers
um but the the classic article on
is that by the philosopher
harry frankfurt which came out of of
course before um
david wrote his book and he makes a very
important distinction everything
bullshitting and lying and bullshitting
being someone who's concerned to be
impressive where the liar is really
he knows all about truth he knows all
about truth and and uh and lies and but
david references this in a footnote but
he says it's not important but
i think it really is and it reflects
back on your point andrew about task
because someone whose task it is to lie
like trump that it's politically
creating something a product which is
politically significant and it's the
same with
so
um
and so it seems to me
we've got a distinction of the
of the liar and and someone doing
jobs is not necessarily
creating
he may be
and uh
and
at another level too there anyway i'll
just leave it at that
the relationship between frankfurt's
work and david's rejection of it and i
think your very important point about
tasks
andrew
thanks
thanks uh my internet is completely
unstable i don't know if you can hear me
oh yeah okay um
yeah andrew mao um
perhaps hand over to both of you for for
the kind of last comments last words or
to take up what chris said or anything
else you've missed along the way
okay i mean but so
relating to what chris said i think um i
think i'll just take that as a helpful
comment chris i don't i don't have a
response but i think it's a really
helpful comment
um
i mean i'm not sure i have anything
additional to add to this um
i think i would just stand by the point
i made to forehead i mean i think
i've offered a critique of jobs
really because i've been contacted
and asked to kind of prepare one for the
purposes of this seminar
um and if you ask me what i think i'll
definitely be what i think and i'll try
to do it as clearly as possible
but i really would stand by the point
that actually
the kind of the playing around the form
of the book the kind of the idea that
the kind of research method itself could
be making an interjection into how
people think
i i think that that is a valuable
contribution all right so yeah i think
i'll just reiterate what i said i don't
i don't think it's good analytically
but i think it's a good exercise in
thinking through the sorts of things
anthropology could be for yeah
thanks
mal would you like to add anything
um
yeah my i have two things to say first
that i am i'm quite skeptical of any
approach to
working on level work and all about
labor
which are two different things uh and so
any any focus on tasks and work on on
single aspects that are not holistic or
anthropological
i found it problematic and that david
was trying to avoid that in all his work
um but the second thing is that um
yeah i think it's
um
i think it's an interesting book to
reflect about the role of anthropology
in in in
in the public
and uh that there are times in which
anthropology comes out and dancing which
probably
uh
it shouldn't or it is it's not easy to
come out uh in
in a way that doesn't compromise with
the
what we do best uh i think david at that
time did something that he thought he
had to do as a as a public
uh intellectual as an activist and
and he did it
also as a great anthropologist
thank you thanks so much um thanks to
both of you for this
brilliant kind of wide-ranging
discussion exposition and also to
everybody that's been
come that commented and not just today
but throughout this seminar series and
really want to thank everybody that's
been coming along too and um
all our presenters several of who are
here here today
okay everybody thank you so much